README.md, before:

`An object appears at your feet! The voice of Anhur rings out: "Use my gift wisely!" a - an athame named Magicbane.`

[![Hackage](https://img.shields.io/hackage/v/magicbane.svg?style=flat)](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/magicbane)
[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/myfreeweb/magicbane.svg?style=flat)](https://travis-ci.org/myfreeweb/magicbane)
[![unlicense](https://img.shields.io/badge/un-license-green.svg?style=flat)](https://unlicense.org)

# magicbane

Magicbane is a Haskell framework for developing ops-friendly, high-performance, RESTful web services.

Okay, that's [Dropwizard](https://www.dropwizard.io)'s tagline.
But just like Dropwizard in the Java world, Magicbane combines the best available Haskell libraries to provide a complete web development experience that reduces bikeshedding, wheel reinvention and the number of `import` lines. Hopefully :)

In particular, Magicbane combines the following libraries:

- [RIO](https://github.com/commercialhaskell/rio) for the Prelude.
- [Servant](http://haskell-servant.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) for REST. It lets you describe web APIs with expressive type system features and implement request handlers with simple functions. Actually somewhat similar to JAX-RS/Jersey, but instead of annotations we have types, because it's Haskell instead of Java. The main feature of Magicbane is an easy way to add *stuff* (okay, let's call it "modules") on top of Servant.
- [Warp](https://www.stackage.org/package/warp) for HTTP.
- [Aeson](https://www.stackage.org/package/aeson) for JSON.
- [data-has](https://www.stackage.org/package/data-has) for extending the app context with services (modules). That thing remotely resembles dependency injection. But it's really cool!
- [envy](https://www.stackage.org/package/envy) for configuration. [Store config in environment variables](https://12factor.net/config)!
- [fast-logger](https://www.stackage.org/package/fast-logger) for logging. Integrated into RIO's logging API, and `monad-logger` as well for libraries that use it.
- [EKG](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg)+[monad-metrics](https://www.stackage.org/package/monad-metrics) for metrics. `monad-metrics` lets you easily measure things in your application: just use `label`/`counter`/`distribution`/`gauge`/`timed` in your handlers. The EKG ecosystem has backends for [InfluxDB](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg-influxdb), [Carbon (Graphite)](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg-carbon), [statsd](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg-statsd), [Prometheus](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg-prometheus-adapter) and others… And a simple local [web server](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg-wai) for development.
- [refined](https://nikita-volkov.github.io/refined/) for validation. Why use functions for input validation when you can use types? Magicbane integrates `refined` with Aeson, so you can write things like `count ∷ Refined Positive Int` in your data type definitions and inputs that don't satisfy the constraints will be rejected when input is processed.
- [http-client](https://www.stackage.org/package/http-client)([-tls](https://www.stackage.org/package/http-client-tls)) for, well, making HTTP requests. Most high level HTTP client libraries are built on top of that. Magicbane provides a small composable interface based on [http-conduit](https://www.stackage.org/package/http-conduit), which lets you e.g. stream the response body directly into [an HTML parser](https://www.stackage.org/package/html-conduit).
- [http-link-header](https://www.stackage.org/package/http-link-header) for the [HTTP `Link` header](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5988#section-5), unsurprisingly.
- [unliftio](https://www.stackage.org/package/unliftio) for uhhh [unlifting](https://github.com/fpco/unliftio/tree/master/unliftio#readme).
- [wai-cli](https://www.stackage.org/package/wai-cli) for starting Warp. Why write the same stuff in the `main` function for every new app when you can just use this one. It supports stuff people usually forget to implement there, like UNIX domain sockets, socket activation and graceful shutdown.

Not part of Magicbane, but recommended:

- [rapid](https://www.stackage.org/package/rapid) for fast development with GHCi hot reload.
- [hasql](https://www.stackage.org/package/hasql) for talking to PostgreSQL.
- [html-conduit](https://www.stackage.org/package/html-conduit) for parsing HTML.
- [microformats2-parser](https://www.stackage.org/package/microformats2-parser) for parsing microformats2 from that HTML.
- [pcre-heavy](https://www.stackage.org/package/pcre-heavy) for regular expressions.

Magicbane was extracted from [Sweetroll](https://github.com/myfreeweb/sweetroll).

## Usage

Here's a hello world service. Just a simple file you can launch with [stack script](https://docs.haskellstack.org/en/stable/GUIDE/#script-interpreter)! (Don't use stack script in production though, use proper stack builds, with optimizations and the threaded runtime.)

```haskell
#!/usr/bin/env stack
{- stack runghc --package magicbane -}
{-# LANGUAGE NoImplicitPrelude, OverloadedStrings, UnicodeSyntax, DataKinds, TypeOperators #-}
import RIO
import Magicbane

type HelloRoute = "hello" :> QueryParam "to" Text :> Get '[PlainText] Text
type ExampleAPI = HelloRoute
exampleAPI = Proxy ∷ Proxy ExampleAPI

hello ∷ Maybe Text → BasicApp Text
hello x = do
  let x' = fromMaybe "anonymous" x
  logInfo $ "Saying hello to " <> display x'
  return $ "Hello " <> x' <> "!"

main = do
  ctx ← newBasicContext
  defWaiMain $ magicbaneApp exampleAPI EmptyContext ctx hello
```

This defines an API that consists of just one endpoint, `/hello?to=someone`, that does exactly what it says on the tin.
Looks like a normal Servant app, but the handler is defined as a `BasicApp` action. What's that?

That's just an example context for simple apps:

```haskell
type BasicContext = (ModHttpClient, ModLogger)
type BasicApp α = RIO BasicContext α
```

Why isn't there `Handler` / `ExceptT` mentioned anywhere?
Well, [it's an antipattern](https://www.fpcomplete.com/blog/2016/11/exceptions-best-practices-haskell) that is now incompatible with [http-conduit](https://github.com/snoyberg/http-client/commit/dfbcb6c28a3216d0a69adfa9ccc8bdf62aff974d) (needs `MonadUnliftIO`) and [monad-metrics](https://github.com/parsonsmatt/monad-metrics/commit/17546b92b4e7e94279b81afe76fd6daa5f3ff0f8) (needs `MonadMask`).
So Magicbane [got rid of Servant's ExceptT usage](https://www.parsonsmatt.org/2017/06/21/exceptional_servant_handling.html).
To return a `servantErr`, just [`throwM`](https://www.stackage.org/haddock/lts-11.15/rio-0.1.3.0/RIO.html#v:throwM) ([`throwIO`](https://www.stackage.org/haddock/lts-10.9/unliftio-0.2.4.0/UnliftIO-Exception.html#v:throwIO)) it.

Anyway, let's make our own context instead of using the basic one:

```haskell
#!/usr/bin/env stack
{- stack runghc --package magicbane -}
{-# LANGUAGE NoImplicitPrelude, OverloadedStrings, UnicodeSyntax, DataKinds, TypeOperators #-}
import RIO
import Magicbane

type MyAppContext = (ModLogger, ModMetrics)
type MyApp = RIO MyAppContext

type HelloRoute = "hello" :> QueryParam "to" Text :> Get '[PlainText] Text
type ExampleAPI = HelloRoute
exampleAPI = Proxy ∷ Proxy ExampleAPI

hello ∷ Maybe Text → MyApp Text
hello x = timed "hello" $ do
  let x' = fromMaybe "anonymous" x
  logInfo $ "Saying hello to " <> display x'
  return $ "Hello " <> x' <> "!"

main = do
  (_, modLogg) ← newLogger (LogStderr defaultBufSize) simpleFormatter
  metrStore ← serverMetricStore <$> forkMetricsServer "0.0.0.0" 8800
  modMetr ← newMetricsWith metrStore
  let ctx = (modLogg, modMetr)
  defWaiMain $ magicbaneApp exampleAPI EmptyContext ctx hello
```

Now we have metrics and logging instead of HTTP client and logging!
`timed` is used here to measure how long it takes to say hello.

See the `examples` directory for more examples.

## Development

Use [stack] to build.  

```bash
$ stack build
```

And to run the examples:

```bash
$ stack exec runghc examples/larger.hs
```

[stack]: https://github.com/commercialhaskell/stack

## Contributing

Please feel free to submit pull requests!

By participating in this project you agree to follow the [Contributor Code of Conduct](https://contributor-covenant.org/version/1/4/).

## License

This is free and unencumbered software released into the public domain.  
For more information, please refer to the `UNLICENSE` file or [unlicense.org](https://unlicense.org).

(However, the dependencies are not all unlicense'd!)

Commit message:

Updated readme with a note regarding the changes to refined library and validation module

README.md, after:

`An object appears at your feet! The voice of Anhur rings out: "Use my gift wisely!" a - an athame named Magicbane.`

[![Hackage](https://img.shields.io/hackage/v/magicbane.svg?style=flat)](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/magicbane)
[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/myfreeweb/magicbane.svg?style=flat)](https://travis-ci.org/myfreeweb/magicbane)
[![unlicense](https://img.shields.io/badge/un-license-green.svg?style=flat)](https://unlicense.org)

# magicbane

Magicbane is a Haskell framework for developing ops-friendly, high-performance, RESTful web services.

Okay, that's [Dropwizard](https://www.dropwizard.io)'s tagline.
But just like Dropwizard in the Java world, Magicbane combines the best available Haskell libraries to provide a complete web development experience that reduces bikeshedding, wheel reinvention and the number of `import` lines. Hopefully :)

In particular, Magicbane combines the following libraries:

- [RIO](https://github.com/commercialhaskell/rio) for the Prelude.
- [Servant](http://haskell-servant.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) for REST. It lets you describe web APIs with expressive type system features and implement request handlers with simple functions. Actually somewhat similar to JAX-RS/Jersey, but instead of annotations we have types, because it's Haskell instead of Java. The main feature of Magicbane is an easy way to add *stuff* (okay, let's call it "modules") on top of Servant.
- [Warp](https://www.stackage.org/package/warp) for HTTP.
- [Aeson](https://www.stackage.org/package/aeson) for JSON.
- [data-has](https://www.stackage.org/package/data-has) for extending the app context with services (modules). That thing remotely resembles dependency injection. But it's really cool!
- [envy](https://www.stackage.org/package/envy) for configuration. [Store config in environment variables](https://12factor.net/config)!
- [fast-logger](https://www.stackage.org/package/fast-logger) for logging. Integrated into RIO's logging API, and `monad-logger` as well for libraries that use it.
- [EKG](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg)+[monad-metrics](https://www.stackage.org/package/monad-metrics) for metrics. `monad-metrics` lets you easily measure things in your application: just use `label`/`counter`/`distribution`/`gauge`/`timed` in your handlers. The EKG ecosystem has backends for [InfluxDB](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg-influxdb), [Carbon (Graphite)](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg-carbon), [statsd](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg-statsd), [Prometheus](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg-prometheus-adapter) and others… And a simple local [web server](https://www.stackage.org/package/ekg-wai) for development.
- [refined](https://nikita-volkov.github.io/refined/) for validation. Why use functions for input validation when you can use types?
- [http-client](https://www.stackage.org/package/http-client)([-tls](https://www.stackage.org/package/http-client-tls)) for, well, making HTTP requests. Most high level HTTP client libraries are built on top of that. Magicbane provides a small composable interface based on [http-conduit](https://www.stackage.org/package/http-conduit), which lets you e.g. stream the response body directly into [an HTML parser](https://www.stackage.org/package/html-conduit).
- [http-link-header](https://www.stackage.org/package/http-link-header) for the [HTTP `Link` header](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5988#section-5), unsurprisingly.
- [unliftio](https://www.stackage.org/package/unliftio) for uhhh [unlifting](https://github.com/fpco/unliftio/tree/master/unliftio#readme).
- [wai-cli](https://www.stackage.org/package/wai-cli) for starting Warp. Why write the same stuff in the `main` function for every new app when you can just use this one. It supports stuff people usually forget to implement there, like UNIX domain sockets, socket activation and graceful shutdown.

Not part of Magicbane, but recommended:

- [rapid](https://www.stackage.org/package/rapid) for fast development with GHCi hot reload.
- [hasql](https://www.stackage.org/package/hasql) for talking to PostgreSQL.
- [html-conduit](https://www.stackage.org/package/html-conduit) for parsing HTML.
- [microformats2-parser](https://www.stackage.org/package/microformats2-parser) for parsing microformats2 from that HTML.
- [pcre-heavy](https://www.stackage.org/package/pcre-heavy) for regular expressions.

Magicbane was extracted from [Sweetroll](https://github.com/myfreeweb/sweetroll).



## Usage

Here's a hello world service. Just a simple file you can launch with [stack script](https://docs.haskellstack.org/en/stable/GUIDE/#script-interpreter)! (Don't use stack script in production though, use proper stack builds, with optimizations and the threaded runtime.)

```haskell
#!/usr/bin/env stack
{- stack runghc --package magicbane -}
{-# LANGUAGE NoImplicitPrelude, OverloadedStrings, UnicodeSyntax, DataKinds, TypeOperators #-}
import RIO
import Magicbane

type HelloRoute = "hello" :> QueryParam "to" Text :> Get '[PlainText] Text
type ExampleAPI = HelloRoute
exampleAPI = Proxy ∷ Proxy ExampleAPI

hello ∷ Maybe Text → BasicApp Text
hello x = do
  let x' = fromMaybe "anonymous" x
  logInfo $ "Saying hello to " <> display x'
  return $ "Hello " <> x' <> "!"

main = do
  ctx ← newBasicContext
  defWaiMain $ magicbaneApp exampleAPI EmptyContext ctx hello
```

This defines an API that consists of just one endpoint, `/hello?to=someone`, that does exactly what it says on the tin.
Looks like a normal Servant app, but the handler is defined as a `BasicApp` action. What's that?

That's just an example context for simple apps:

```haskell
type BasicContext = (ModHttpClient, ModLogger)
type BasicApp α = RIO BasicContext α
```

Why isn't there `Handler` / `ExceptT` mentioned anywhere?
Well, [it's an antipattern](https://www.fpcomplete.com/blog/2016/11/exceptions-best-practices-haskell) that is now incompatible with [http-conduit](https://github.com/snoyberg/http-client/commit/dfbcb6c28a3216d0a69adfa9ccc8bdf62aff974d) (needs `MonadUnliftIO`) and [monad-metrics](https://github.com/parsonsmatt/monad-metrics/commit/17546b92b4e7e94279b81afe76fd6daa5f3ff0f8) (needs `MonadMask`).
So Magicbane [got rid of Servant's ExceptT usage](https://www.parsonsmatt.org/2017/06/21/exceptional_servant_handling.html).
To return a `servantErr`, just [`throwM`](https://www.stackage.org/haddock/lts-11.15/rio-0.1.3.0/RIO.html#v:throwM) ([`throwIO`](https://www.stackage.org/haddock/lts-10.9/unliftio-0.2.4.0/UnliftIO-Exception.html#v:throwIO)) it.

Anyway, let's make our own context instead of using the basic one:

```haskell
#!/usr/bin/env stack
{- stack runghc --package magicbane -}
{-# LANGUAGE NoImplicitPrelude, OverloadedStrings, UnicodeSyntax, DataKinds, TypeOperators #-}
import RIO
import Magicbane

type MyAppContext = (ModLogger, ModMetrics)
type MyApp = RIO MyAppContext

type HelloRoute = "hello" :> QueryParam "to" Text :> Get '[PlainText] Text
type ExampleAPI = HelloRoute
exampleAPI = Proxy ∷ Proxy ExampleAPI

hello ∷ Maybe Text → MyApp Text
hello x = timed "hello" $ do
  let x' = fromMaybe "anonymous" x
  logInfo $ "Saying hello to " <> display x'
  return $ "Hello " <> x' <> "!"

main = do
  (_, modLogg) ← newLogger (LogStderr defaultBufSize) simpleFormatter
  metrStore ← serverMetricStore <$> forkMetricsServer "0.0.0.0" 8800
  modMetr ← newMetricsWith metrStore
  let ctx = (modLogg, modMetr)
  defWaiMain $ magicbaneApp exampleAPI EmptyContext ctx hello
```

Now we have metrics and logging instead of HTTP client and logging!
`timed` is used here to measure how long it takes to say hello.

See the `examples` directory for more examples.

## A note regarding the `refined` library

The `refined` library provides a way of working with  Refinement Types, so you can write things like `count ∷ Refined Positive Int` to give you a compile-time guarantee that count is a Positive Integer. Magicbane originally extended the `refined` library by intergating with Aeson, for validating JSON at type boundaries e.g. to refine/sanitise an unrefined external input to its refined internal type. This Aeson integration is now provided natively by the `refined` library, so now we just re-export `refined` here, for convenience.

## Development

Use [stack] to build.  

```bash
$ stack build
```

And to run the examples:

```bash
$ stack exec runghc examples/larger.hs
```

[stack]: https://github.com/commercialhaskell/stack

## Contributing

Please feel free to submit pull requests!

By participating in this project you agree to follow the [Contributor Code of Conduct](https://contributor-covenant.org/version/1/4/).

## License

This is free and unencumbered software released into the public domain.  
For more information, please refer to the `UNLICENSE` file or [unlicense.org](https://unlicense.org).

(However, the dependencies are not all unlicense'd!)
